---
layout: post
title: Technology and Tragic Decisions
date: 2017-11-26
excerpt: technology is "deliberately directed tragedy"
tags: technology progress book
---

My thoughts this morning are centered around the book that I am reading - Kevin Kelly's What Technology Wants. As one of the founders of the magazine Wired he is obviously very pro-technology, but he also comes with the experience of roughly a decade of low income nomadic travel, experience that informs his perspective on the specific role that technology can or should play in our daily lives. Technology is good, he says, despite its many obvious ills, partly because of the choices it opens up for us. A plurality of choices is always better than no choice.

A few years ago I watched a TED talk from psychologist Barry Schwartz on the 'paradox of choice'. This phenomena is one of paralysis and regret: the **paralysis** that can be induced by extreme diversity of choice, such as walking into a grocery store and seeing dozens of options for something as simple as a toothbrush, and the **regret** that follows after a decision has been made, when one deconstructs the decision and reflects on other possible outcomes. Schwartz's conclusion was that choice does not necessarily mean happiness, and our ability to navigate through the ocean of choices building before us will be one the great challenges of the modern age.

Kelly acknowledges the ideas behind the "Paradox of Choice", but he maintains that choice is still better than no choice, and the diversity of options opened up by technology will be answered by technology, the form of which will be "choice-assist technologies" that provide decision making support. Forms of this are all around on the web in the form of search engines (navigating the diversity of web pages) and recommendation systems (navigating the diversity of products and media). Despite the enormous collection of songs available on Spotify I do not fret over what to listen to (most of the time), but instead rely on intelligent playlists and radio stations to feed me media. Despite the millions of objects available on Amazon, choice-assist technologies in the form of recommendations and user reviews enable people to purchase in ways that are assumably regret limited. At some point these decision technologies may make their way into the physical world.

There are additional problems opened up by choice. William Lowrance discusses a major one in his book *Modern Science and Human Values*, which is that sometimes the choices we create have a fundamentally tragic nature. These decisions are not tragic in the sense of being something bad or unhappy, but in the high sense of the word: "the deliberate confrontation of deeply important but nearly irresolvable life issues". The invention of new medical technologies, such as the artificial respirator, opens up new possibilities, chief among them the potential to extend someone's life with the hope that they be able to start breathing on their own, but it also involves the conflict between various values both ideal and practical: the sanctity of life, the accumulation of medical costs, the rightness of potentially keeping someone indefinitely in a vegetative state. The conflict between values is what causes Lowrance to declare technological progress to be a "deliberately directed tragedy".

Technology opens doors. Choices we never used to have are now abundant and ubiquitous. Many of these are low-grade, low-impact, and contribute to perhaps some overall anxiety that may be ameliorated by choice-assist technologies. Others present to us conflicts between our deeply held values, and the decisions we make may themselves start to define a hierarchy between our values that never needed to exist before. It may be that we don't know who we are and what we believe until we are presented with situations that require us to choose from a number of different paths. Technology is building these paths, but we still must choose which to walk.
