---
layout: post
title: Is human-technology symbiosis pro-life?
date: 2017-11-28
excerpt: Nature has proven itself to be stable and pro-life. Technology, for all its potential, has not yet done so.
tags: technology progress book nature
---

One of the things discussed by Kevin Kelly in his book *What Technology Wants* is the growing symbiosis between humans and their technology, in which he compares our use of pen and paper for long division to the use of search engines and the distributed knowledge base of the internet for memory and fact retrieval. There is a continuum between one and the other, not a discontinuity. This comparison is made to ward off techno nay-sayers who worry about our growing reliance on technology. We have already been reliant on our technology for millenia. What has been happening recently is nothing new.

My own approach to new technologies is to rapidly snap them up while at the same time worrying about how they might be affecting me and my relationship to the world. There are benefits to any new technology, just as there are downsides, and it might be as Kelly says that the ups outweigh the downs. This balance can be a hard one to assess, and there is the danger that any individual, localized assessment is too short-sighted, placing too much emphasis on the immediate short-term gains without giving enough care to the potential long-term losses. Certainly when I decide to own and use a smartphone I am recognizing the value it bring to my life in being more connected and in having a portable and flexible pocket computer - a camera, a notebook, etc. But invisible to me are the industrial systems in place to create that device and bring it to me: the mines for raw materials, the factories, the large scale infrastructures. The effects of these systems can enter into my calculations only in a limited, disembodied kind of way. How can we be sure that an accurate assessment is being made of the balance? Or is this the kind of thing that can only be determined after the negative aspects of our decisions have become widespread or large enough to be noticed?

Beyond the ecological effects of technology are the extended personalized effects as technology changes habits and effectively rewires the brain. Technology use can, at times, be very similar to drug use, in that the reward centers of our brains are triggered to release neurochemicals such as dopamine (consider your internal response when opening a social media app and seeing new 'likes' or enticing new posts). Technology can be addictive. Sometimes this addiction is a deliberately designed and optimized feature of the product, masked under terms such as "engagement" or "retention"). Can the long term positive benefits of a technology be a trustworthy part of the equation when usage seems to be driven, at least in part, by short term psychological needs?

Kelly points out that humans seem to have some predilections about the world around them: biophilia and technophilia. The love of Living Things and the love of Made Things. We love life because we recognize that it is a fleeting thing and we appreciate whatever shared connections we have access to. And we love our technological creations because they often represent the best parts of our rational minds, our attempts to solve problems and bring forth creations that may outlive us. In the sum of gains and losses taking place in the world around us, we hope that the balance comes out in favor of Life, including its beauty, its growth, and its seeming tendency toward greater awareness.

In the constantly shifting balance between the Natural world and the Artificial one, we hope that any negative aspects of our technological creations, such as environmental pollution and degradation, income inequality and social instability, etc., are more than overcome by the ability of these inventions to lead sizable portions of the population forward into knowledge, autonomy, and transcendence. In this comparison, the time scales of Nature versus Artifice end up leaving much to a matter of faith. Natural systems have emerged on almost geologic time scales and have proven themselves to be stable, dependable, and overwhelmingly in favor of the existence of life and the emergence of consciousness and complex symbiotic systems. The timescale of technical systems now evolves much faster than even a single human generation and has not yet entirely proved that it is best for a single individual (although many will readily admit that they are better off with technology's benefits), let alone a society or ecosystem. When it comes down to the facts, Nature has proven itself to be stable and pro-life, while Technology has not yet sufficiently demonstrated this. All the same, Technology exists because we continue to find in it a great potential to carry us forward into uncharted territory, land that once explored is readily admitted to be better than that from which we came. The hope for better things is a wonderful motivator, but we must be consably aware of the elements of the greater world, and of ourselves, that might be put in jeopardy by this pursuit.
